# entertainingfooty
UChicago supplemental essay exploring what the most entertaining premier league games were in 2021-22


Subway maps, evolutionary trees, Lewis diagrams. Each of these schematics tells the relationships and stories of their component parts. Reimagine a map, diagram, or chart. If your work is largely or exclusively visual, please include a cartographer's key of at least 300 words to help us best understand your creation.

	Every Saturday morning, I’ll sit down with a warm coffee in my hand and watch English Premier League soccer with my father. By the time the 30th minute rolls around, my dad will fall asleep, and my phone will blow up with text messages. With just the Spanish commentators — I can’t stand the monotone, emotionless English ones — to guide me, I furiously type my reactions to my friends, carefully waiting approximately 27 seconds because of their delay. This weekly tradition has become a staple of my weekend, so I am justifiably annoyed when it’s broken. While I jump at the chance to watch a mid-table battle between two weaker teams, my friends constantly select the “big games.” But, those “big games” provide a slow, unentertaining product compared to the end-to-end action seen from teams farther down the table. This argument is discarded week after week. This map, a quadrant chart, will hopefully help.
	To look at what types of games provide the most entertainment, I loaded the worldfootballR package on R, a coding language for statistical computing. After 3 hours of loading and over 100 lines of code, I scraped the data from all 380 matches played in the English Premier League last season. Since there's no objective way to define what makes a soccer game entertaining, I took a subjective approach that accounted for what my friends and I value the most: action in front of goal and chaos. With the popularity of the xG (expected goals) metric, which calculates the probability that a shot will result in a goal and quantifies the quality of an attacking opportunity, the action in front of goal was more straightforward to compute. However, no one enjoys watching a blowout, so I subtracted the difference between the winning team's and the losing team’s xG and multiplied by 0.5 before I added it to the game’s total xG, allowing the competitiveness of the game to gain a noticeable, but not overwhelming, influence. This new metric was put on the x-axis, with larger values representing matches with lots of goalscoring opportunities from both sides. Measuring how chaotic and end-to-end a game presents a different challenge. Inspired by the popular pressing metric PPDA (passes per defensive action), I calculated the TPDA (touches per defensive action) by adding up all of the attacking team’s touches in their defensive and midfield 3rds of the field and dividing it by the defensive team’s tackles and interceptions in that area. A combination of both teams’ TPDAs formed the y-axis, with lower values tied to more chaotic games and larger values associated with slower matches. At its core, TPDA illustrates how many uncontested passes a team can make, quantifying the pace of play. To make sense of the plot, I separated the data into four quadrants, divided by the medians of the x and y axes, and colored the data by the relative quality of the teams (the average of both teams’ end-of-season points). The most entertaining games were found on the bottom left of the plot, demonstrating how some of the best games come from mediocre teams. The three most captivating games, annotated on the chart, came from weaker sides, while hyped-up blockbuster games, also annotated on the plot, found themselves in the least watchable quadrant.
	The minute I finished this visualization, I sent it to the group chat and received a series of electronic groans. With most of them supporting big teams with matches in the top left corner, it’s natural that the data will fail to trump their inherent biases. While I don’t think this chart alone will keep the group chat united every Saturday, it will encourage me to keep giving those games with smaller teams a chance. 
